---
layout: post
title: "Convergence Tests of Infinite Series"
date: 2011-09-04 6:43
comments: true
categories: math
---

The content listed below is also available in "PDF format":http://vikhyat.net/convergence_tests.pdf.

<!--more-->

h2. Positive Term Series

h3. Integral Test

Let \( \sum a_n \) be a positive term series, and let \( a_n = f(n) \) such that \( f(n) \) decreases as \( n \) increases. Then \( \sum a_n \) converges or diverges if \( \int_1^\infty f(x) dx \) is finite or infinite respectively.

h3. p-Series Test

Let \( \sum a_n \) be a positive term series given by \(a_n = \frac1{n^p} \). Then, \( \sum a_n \) is convergent if \( p \gt 1 \), and divergent if \( p \leq 1 \).

h3. Comparison Test

Let \(\sum a_n \) be a positive term series, then:

# \( \sum a_n \) is convergent if \( \sum b_n \) is another convergent series with \( a_n \leq b_n \).
# \( \sum a_n \) is divergent if \( \sum d_n \) is another divergent series with \( a_n \geq d_n \).

h3. Limit Comparison Test

Let \( \sum a_n \) and \(\sum b_n \) be two positive term series.

# If \( \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac{a_n}{b_n} \) is a finite and non-zero positive quantity, then \( \sum a_n \) and \(\sum b_n\) will converge and diverge together.
# If \( \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac{a_n}{b_n} = 0 \) and \(\sum b_n \) is convergent, then \( \sum a_n \) is also convergent.
# If \(\lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac{a_n}{b_n} = \infty \) and \( \sum b_n \) is divergent, then \(\ sum a_n \) is also divergent.

h3. D'Alembert's Ratio Test / Ratio Test

Let \( \sum a_n \) be a positive term series, and let \( \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac{a_{n+1}}{a_n} = r \).

# The series is convergent if \( r \lt 1 \).
# The series is divergent if \( r \gt 1 \), or if \(r\) is infinite.
# The test fails if \(r=1\).

h3. Cauchy's Root Test / Root Test

Let \( \sum a_n \) be a positive term series, and \( \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} (a_n)^{\frac1n} = r \).

# The series is convergent if \( r \lt 1 \).
# The series is divergent if \( r \gt 1 \).
# The test fails if \( r = 1 \).

h3. Raabe's Test

Let \( \sum a_n \) be a positive term series, and \( \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} n \left( \frac{a_n}{a_{n+1}}-1 \right) = k\).

# The series is convergent if \( k \gt 1 \).
# The series is divergent if \( k \lt 1 \).
# The test fails if \( k = 1 \).

h3. Logarithmic Test

Let \( \sum a_n \) be a positive term series, and \( \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \log\left( \frac{a_n}{a_{n+1}} \right) = k\).

# The series is convergent if \( k \gt 1 \).
# The series is divergent if \( k \lt 1 \).
# The test fails if \( k = 1 \).

h2. Alternating Series

h3. Leibniz's Test

If the series \( \sum (-1)^n a_n \) is an alternating series, then the series is convergent if:

# Each term is numerically lesser than the preceeding term. ( \( &#124;a_{n+1}&#124; \lt &#124;a_n&#124; \) )
# \( \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} a_n = 0 \).

